# TMC Performance Evaluation
<hr class="soften-right tight"/>

A tool for evaluating the benefits of Traffic Management Centers using
observed incidents as a baseline for comparison.

## What is TMC Performance Evaulation (TMCPE)?

The TMCPE website is an analysis tool that allows users to estimate
the benefit provided by Caltrans Traffic Management Centers by
estimating the actual delay caused by managed events using Caltrans
loop detector data and modeling the delays that would have occured had
TMC mitigation efforts not occured.

## What benefits can be estimated?</h3>

The TMCPE method uses as its primary performance measure the delay
associated with events that either disrupt the capacity of the system
(e.g., accidents, construction, etc) or alter the demand placed on
particular facilities (e.g., a baseball game).  In order to estimate
the TMC benefits, we have to map the actions of TMC personnel onto the
inputs of the delay estimation model that defines the performance
measures---in this case, the extent and degree of congestion caused by
the event under consideration.


## Background?

Caltrans has a significant investment in TMCs throughout the
state. These operations centers are tasked with maintaining the safety
and efficiency of California's highways by actively managing
disruptions to the system caused by anticipated and unanticipated
events that impact the available capacity and/or the demand to use
individual facilities.

To date, however, no comprehensive methods are available to quantify
the benefits of existing TMC deployments.  This ongoing research
project is developing a TMC performance evaluation system that
addresses this problem. The system allows TMC managers to evaluate the
performance of various bundles of TMC technologies and operational
policies by mapping their effects onto events in the system that can
be measured using existing surveillance systems and daily activity
logs. The resulting tool provides managers with the long needed
capabilities to:

* justify valuable technology, personnel allocations, and maintenance
costs,

* identify technologies that aren’t meeting their initial promise, and

* identify gaps in current operational strategies that might be filled with new technology deployments.

## Method

The evaluation method used primarily considers delay savings that are
attributable to specific TMC actions.  All computations are based on
direct measurement of the system using available sensors and do not
rely on speculative simulation models requiring extensive assumptions.

The system is implemented using a modular software architecture that
can interface with a variety of existing or planned systems used by
Caltrans. The initial deployment focuses on delivering a reporting
system accessible from the Testbed Website. Possible future
deployments could be integrated the core performance evaluation models
with real-time TMC management systems to assist operators with
prioritizing response.

### Input Data

The following datasets are replicated in local Postgresql databases
and used in the analysis:

* PeMS 5 minute data, obtained from the [PeMS clearinghouse](http://pems.eecs.berkeley.edu/")

* District 12 TMC Activity Log Data, the log database is replicated in
  the Caltrans ATMS Testbed

* CHP iCAD data, since mid-2009 replicated as part of the District 12 TMC Activity Log
		  
### Preprocessing Steps

The TMC Activity Log Data is preprocessed to identify the time and
location of critical events in incident management as defined in the
[event management flow charts](http://localhost/redmine/projects/tmcpe/wiki/Event_Management_Flowchart)
including: first call, verification, TMC response actions ranging from
dispatching traffic management team to displaying CMS messages, TMC
monitoring, and the end of incident management.
		  
### Computing Measured Incident Delay.

The delay calculation estimates the time-space region affected by the
incident by using sensor data evidence and assumptions regarding the
physical characteristics of traffic flow.  This evidence is formulated
into an Integer Program that seeks to identify the time-space region
"impacted" by the event such that the degree to which the evidence of
congestion as shown in the following image </p>

<div class="centered cleared">
  <p:image src="doc/tsd-example.png" style="width:67%;border-style:solid;border-width:2px;" />
</div>

which shows how the speed during this incident deviated from the
average (green = close to mean or faster, red=far below the mean
speed).  The blue border shows the affected region estimated by the
TMCPE delay algorithm.  </p> </section>
		  
### Compute TMC Benefits.

The "impacted" time-space region identified in step 3 serves as the
basis for determining the benefits provided by the TMC.  Using this
"control volume" as a starting point, we model the lack of TMC
actions---such as incident verification via CCTV cameras---as a change
in the shape (typically an increase) of the impacted region which
defines additional delay.  The difference between the observed delays
and those estimated in the absence of the TMC is interpreted as delay
savings attributable to TMC actions.  <span class="emph">This feature
is not yet incorporated into the website.</span>

## The Web Application

The web application is designed around three sets of core
functionality: 

* a broad, aggregate view of TMC Performance,
* a detailed, aggregate view of TMC Performance for particular groupings of incidents, and
* a detailed view of TMC Performance for specific incidents

### The Home Pages

In addition to providing this background information about the site,
the main home page (TMCPE) button shows summary statistics for all
incidents in the activity log database including the number that have
been analyzed and the computed delays and attributable TMC delay
savings.

### The Query Interface

More generally, however, the site is designed as a
reporting tool whereby the analyst can define a set of
event criteria using logical and spatial queries to
identify a class of events to study.  Delay and TMC
impact for these events can be viewed and summary
statistics for the selected group are provided.

You can access the query reporting feature by clicking on the Query
Incidents button in the top right corner of the page.

### The Detail View

...

## Further Information

Detailed documentation about the site is available from the
[Testbed issue tracking tool](http://localhost/redmine/projects/tmcpe).
You must be an authenticated user to use this site.  Useful links:

* Tooltips are provided where possible to guide the user on how to use
  the interface
* The [User Guide](http://localhost/redmine/projects/tmcpe/wiki)
